Climate Change
===========
In 2014, the Colorado Water Conservation Board (CWCB) released a report titled "[Climate Change in Colorado: A Synthesis to Support Water Resources Management and Adaptation](https://wwa.colorado.edu/climate/co2014report/Climate_Change_CO_Report_2014_FINAL.pdf)". This, along with the [Citizen's Guide to Colorado Climate Change](https://issuu.com/cfwe/docs/cfwe_cc_cg_web) assess how climate change will affect Colorado's water resources. Key points from the CWCB report include the following (p.1-4):

- All climate model projections indicate future warming in Colorado. The statewide average annual temperatures are projected to warm by +2.5℉ to +5℉ by 2050 relative to a 1971–2000 baseline under a medium-low greenhouse-gas emissions scenario. Under a high emissions scenario, the projected warming is larger at mid-century (+3.5℉ to +6.5℉).
- No long-term trends in average annual precipitation have been detected across Colorado, even considering the relatively dry period since 2000.
- Climate model projections show less agreement regarding future precipitation change for Colorado. The individual model projections of change by 2050 in statewide annual precipitation range from -5% to +6% for one model and from -3% to +8% for another model.
- Snowpack, as measured by April 1 snow-water equivalent (SWE), has been mainly below-average since 2000 in all of Colorado’s river basins, but no long-term (30-year, 50-year) declining trends have been detected.
- Most model projections of Colorado’s spring snowpack show declines for the mid-21st century due to the projected warming.
- The timing of snowmelt and peak runoff has shifted earlier in the spring by 1–4 weeks across Colorado’s river basins over the past 30 years, due to the combination of lower SWE since 2000, the warming trend in spring temperatures and enhanced solar absorption from dust-on-snow.
- The peak of the spring runoff is projected to shift 1–3 weeks earlier by the mid-21st century due to warming. Late-summer flows are projected to decrease as the peak shifts earlier. Changes in the timing of runoff are more certain than changes in the amount of runoff.
- No long-term statewide trends in heavy precipitation events have been detected. The evidence suggests that there has been no statewide trend in the magnitude of flood events, although climate change is expected to result in more intense storms.
- Nearly all of the model projections indicate increasing winter precipitation by 2050. There is weaker consensus among the projections regarding precipitation in the other seasons.
- In the first projections of future Colorado hydrology based on the latest climate model output, most projections show decreases in annual streamflow by 2050 for the San Juan and Rio Grande basins. The projections are more evenly split between future increases and decreases in streamflow by 2050 for the Colorado Headwaters, Gunnison, Arkansas and South Platte basins. However, other hydrology projections show drier outcomes for Colorado, and the overall body of published research indicates a tendency towards future decreases in annual streamflow for all of Colorado’s river basins.

Increasing temperatures will have a significant impact on outdoor water use, irrigated agriculture, and natural vegetation water use, with some estimates of up to 25% more demand, based on higher temperatures and a longer growing season (need citation).

It is difficult to fully quantify the impacts of climate change on water resources. Systems models such as StateMod have been used to simulate river systems using a possible range of precipitation, temperature and related data, in order to understand impacts on water supplies (see the [Colorado River Water Availability Study](http://cwcbweblink.state.co.us/WebLink/ElectronicFile.aspx?docid=158319&searchid=78f0eafa-0b8f-4d8a-9ff3-faf67cc82f52&dbid=0) and the [Colorado River Water Supply and Demand Study](https://www.usbr.gov/lc/region/programs/crbstudy.html)). A general concern among municipal water providers is that the gains due to water conservation will be offset by the impacts of climate change and efforts to develop new water supplies must account not only for certain population growth but uncertain, yet significant, impacts of climate change.