Hydrology Concepts - Return Flows
==============
It may seem as though water is continuously removed from streams for agricultural, municipal and other uses and therefore the amount of water in a stream decreases as one moves downstream. However, water that is diverted for municipal, industrial or agricultural purposes that is not consumed returns to rivers and/or aquifers by surface flows or underground flows. For example, the U.S. Geological Survey has estimated that approximately only 37% of the water diverted statewide for agriculture is actually consumed ([Citizen's Guide to Where Your Water Comes From](https://www.watereducationcolorado.org/publications-and-radio/citizen-guides/citizens-guide-to-where-your-water-comes-from/), p.12).

These surface and underground flows are collectively called return flows and can be used by downstream water users. Types of return flows include runoff and infiltration from agricultural lands, runoff and infiltration from lawns and landscaping and returns from wastewater treatment plants or industry. Irrigation return flows, in particular, are often reused multiple times. Unless a municipality relies exclusively on groundwater or its water supply comes directly from a river’s headwaters, its supply includes reused water. The term “direct reuse” indicates wastewater that is directly used for municipal supply and “indirect reuse” indicates mixing wastewater with other supplies. Many cities in Colorado rely on reused (or recycled) water (Citizen's Guide to Where Your Water Comes From, p.24; [Citizen's Guide to Colorado Water Conservation](https://www.watereducationcolorado.org/publications-and-radio/citizen-guides/citizens-guide-to-colorado-water-conservation/), p.20-21).

Water that has been diverted from other basins (transbasin diversions) contributes flows to streams and can result in some streams actually being larger than natural conditions.

This [diagram](http://water.state.co.us/SurfaceWater/SWRights/WaterDiagrams/Pages/SnakeDiagram.aspx), sometimes called the "snake diagram", from DWR shows how flows greatly increase downstream of Denver, which allows reuse for agriculture and other purposes. In general, municipalities seek cleaner water supplies, which often means acquiring mountain supplies. In some cases, exchanges can occur, for example, allowing a municipality to use cleaner mountain water supplies in exchange for agricultural or other users taking water from municipal water rights downstream. This allows different water providers in a region to share infrastructure and water supplies to optimize the system.

Notice how both the South Platte and Arkansas rivers do not gain large amounts of flow like rivers on the West Slope. Rather, these rivers' widths are narrower and a more consistent width along their lengths. This is an indication that the basins rely on return flows and reuse to utilize lower basin supplies to meet multiple needs.

Resources for understanding more about return flows in the Basin can be found [here](http://southplatte.colostate.edu/resources.shtml?expanddiv=none). The report "[Return of Seepage Water to the Lower South Platte River in Colorado](http://localhost:8000/resources/parshall-return-of-seepage-on-south-platte.pdf)"(7.6MB) also provides historical context.