Hydrology Concepts - The Hydrologic Cycle
==============

Hydrology is the study of water.

As a science, hydrology has evolved in response to the need to understand Earth's complex water systems and help solve water problems. The supply of water available for human use is limited by nature. Although there is plenty of water on Earth, it is not always in the right place at the right time and of the right quality.

Hydrology encompasses the occurrence, distribution, movement and properties of water and its relationship with the environment within each phase of the hydrologic cycle, shown at right. The hydrologic cycle, or water cycle, is a continuous process by which water is purified by evaporation and transported from the Earth's surface (including the oceans) into the atmosphere and back to the land and oceans. All of the physical, chemical and biological processes involving water as it travels its various paths in the atmosphere (e.g., condensation and precipitation), over and beneath the Earth's surface (e.g., infiltration and snowmelt runoff) and through growing plants (e.g., transpiration) are studied.

There are many pathways water may take in its continuous cycle of falling as rainfall or snowfall and returning to the atmosphere. Water may be captured for millions of years in polar ice caps. It may flow to rivers and finally to the sea. It may soak into the soil to be evaporated directly from the soil surface as it dries or be transpired by growing plants. It may percolate through the soil to ground water reservoirs (aquifers) to be stored or it may flow to wells or springs or back to streams by seepage. The cycle for water may be short or it may take millions of years.

~ From the [USGS Water Science School](https://www.usgs.gov/special-topic/water-science-school/science/what-hydrology?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects).
