

Hydrology Concepts - Hydrographs
==============
Hydrographs summarize river flows over a period of time, using a “time series” of data. A time series is a time-ordered sequence of dates (possibly also with time of day) with corresponding data values. Hydrographs provide a way to understand variation, trends and relationships in water data. Other data types can be similarly graphed, but the word “hydrograph” is typically used when presenting water depth, flow and/or volume over time.

In Colorado, average annual statewide precipitation is 16 inches, with most regions receiving 12-16 inches. The mountainous areas of the state receive more water. Most areas above 10,000 feet in elevation receive 25 inches or more annually, mostly in the form of snow. The snowpack typically builds up in the early spring from storms originating in the Pacific Ocean that move eastward. The snowpack begins to melt in April and feeds into the State’s rivers. Peak runoff from snowmelt occurs in May and June. According to the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS), approximately 80% of river runoff comes from snowmelt. The remainder comes from rainfall and infiltration from groundwater ([Citizen's Guide to Where Your Water Comes From](https://www.watereducationcolorado.org/publications-and-radio/citizen-guides/citizens-guide-to-where-your-water-comes-from/), p.4-6).

Understanding snowmelt amount and timing is critical to water resources planning. The amount of snow and rain that feeds into rivers varies within a single year and also from year to year. Hydrographs show the rate of flow (discharge) versus time past a specific point in a river, typically a streamgage (discussed in a later section). The rate of flow is typically expressed in cubic feet per second (cfs).

This interactive visualization shows five annual hydrographs from a streamgage on Boulder Creek. Each line represents a year of flow data and shows the variability that can occur from year to year. To select/deselect years on the plot, click on the year in the legend at the bottom. Note that even though these years represent a wide range of flows observed on Boulder Creek at this location, flows are most variable from mid-April to August. (Source: [CDSS HydroBase](https://dnrweb.state.co.us/cdss/))

The year classifications (e.g., "Much Below Normal") are based on USGS terminology and are categorized as follows:

- <span style="color:#b30000;">Less than 10th percentile = Much Below Normal</span>
- <span style="color:#fe9929;">10th - 24th percentile = Below Normal</span>
- <span style="color:green;">25th - 75th percentile = Normal</span>
- <span style="color:#6baed6;">76th - 90th percentile = Above Normal</span>
- <span style="color:#08519c;">Greater than 90th percentile = Much Above Normal</span>

