Hydrology Concepts - Streamgages and Measuring Flows
=============

In order to manage the water resources of Colorado it is necessary to measure the surface water flow in natural streams and water distribution infrastructure. Streamflow, also called discharge, in Colorado is measured by the [U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)](https://waterdata.usgs.gov/nwis/sw), [Colorado Division of Water Resources (DWR)](http://www.dwr.state.co.us/Surfacewater/default.aspx), local water utilities and other entities that need to know flow amounts for reporting and operations. Sensors and data loggers (also called data collection units (DCUs) or stage discharge recorders (SDRs)) may record measurements at regular intervals and can be triggered by changing values such as a rain event. These measurements, often referred to as real-time or instantaneous, may or may not be publicly available. Real-time data are often publicly reported at 15-minute intervals, representing average conditions over that time. These values are then aggregated to longer intervals including hour and day. Average values are often suitable for water supply management operations, whereas instantaneous values may be used to monitor peak flows, environmental flows or other critical conditions.

It is important to recognize that a daily average flow, such as reported by USGS or DWR, does not mean that the flow was the same from midnight to midnight; in actuality, the flow could have varied significantly during the day and using shorter-interval data is necessary to understand the variation.

Each organization that collects data assigns a station identifier and name to the station. Multiple data sources, identifier conventions and data formats can present challenges to finding and using data.

This map shows active streamgages operated by DWR, USGS or other entities such as a municipal utility. Click on a circle for more information, including links to the website for each gage, which shows current flow conditions measured by the gage. (Source: [CDSS Map Viewer](https://gis.colorado.gov/dnrviewer/Index.html?viewer=mapviewer), Surface Water Current Conditions layer, "Active Gage - Stream" option.)

Measuring streamflow in natural channels to a reasonable level of accuracy can be challenging. See the [USGS information](https://www.usgs.gov/special-topic/water-science-school/science/how-streamflow-measured?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects) about how streamflow is measured. It is particularly challenging to measure flow in channels that change over time, such as the South Platte River in wide, sandy locations.