Hydrology Concepts - Diversion Headgates and Measuring Diversions
====================
To divert water from a river into a ditch or canal, diversion structures are installed in the river. Structures divert water for several reasons: to directly deliver water to agricultural land, to carry water to other ditches, to divert water into a storage reservoir or to deliver water for other purposes such as for municipal use. Structures can be in the form of dams, pumps and headgates. Headgates are typically metal gates that are raised and lowered to allow a controlled amount of water to flow into a ditch or canal. The amount diverted depends on the water needed at that time and location, adherence to Colorado water law priority system and river conditions. Water may not be physically available if the river flow is low and may not be taken if flows are extremely high and may damage infrastructure. Diversion structures are identified using a Water District Identifier (WDID), consisting of a two-digit water district identifier and five-digit structure identifier. Each diversion structure has one or more water rights that indicate seniority, use type and amount.

Measurement of diversions occurs in various ways. Larger diversion structures may include a measurement structure such as a weir which, in combination with a water level sensor and rating, convert water level (stage) to flow (discharge); this provides a reasonable estimate of the diversion amount. Many large diversion structures now have telemetered automated data measurement. Similar to streamflow, diversion measurements may be available as real-time data (15-minute or hourly) or as longer intervals that are typically used for historical data analysis. The accuracy of diversion measurement will depend on the measurement device design and calibration and can be impacted by sediment, flow impediments such as tree trunks, technology issues and degradation of the infrastructure, such as settling, cracking and vegetation growth. [Diversion records](http://www.dwr.state.co.us/SurfaceWater/data/division.aspx?div=1) maintained by DWR indicate how much water was measured (or estimated) to have been diverted at a structure.

This map shows ditch diversion structures in the Basin, of which there are over 3,500 (note these include active, inactive and historical diversions; also note these are just ditch diversions and not diversions for other structure types, such as wells). Structures are color-coded based on water source: the 10 streams with the most diversions are colored and listed in order (i.e., the South Platte River has the most ditch diversions, followed by the Cache la Poudre River); diversions from all other streams are shown in black.

The table below lists the number of ditch diversions on each stream in the Basin for those streams that have 10 or more ditch diversion structures.

<!-- This table can be produced in Markdown, however csvToHTML() function will be used in this instance. -->
<!-- |Water_Source	|Number\_of\_Structures|
|----------|-----------|
|SOUTH PLATTE RIVER	|   403|
|CACHE LA POUDRE RIVER	|   201|
|BOULDER CREEK	|141|
|SAINT VRAIN CREEK	|141|
|CLEAR CREEK	|110|
|BIG THOMPSON RIVER	|96|
|TARRYALL CREEK	|75|
|NORTH FORK SOUTH PLATTE RIVER	|68|
|BEAR CREEK	|64|
|SOUTH BOULDER CREEK	|53|
|MIDDLE FORK SOUTH PLATTE RIVER	|52|
|SOUTH FORK SOUTH PLATTE RIVER	|51|
|DRY CREEK	|44|
|FISH CREEK	|43|
|MICHIGAN CREEK	|43|
|COAL CREEK	|40|
|LONE TREE CREEK	|39|
|CHERRY CREEK	|38|
|DEER CREEK	|31|
|LITTLE THOMPSON RIVER	|31|
|SOUTH FORK REPUBLICAN RIVER	|31|
|BIG DRY CREEK	|30|
|COLORADO RIVER	|30|
|FOURMILE CREEK	|30|
|LEFT HAND CREEK	|30|
|LARAMIE RIVER	|29|
|WEST PLUM CREEK	|27|
|BEAVER CREEK	|25|
|KIOWA CREEK	|25|
|SPRING CREEK	|24|
|JEFFERSON CREEK	|22|
|ROCK CREEK	|22|
|CEDAR CREEK	|21|
|RALSTON CREEK	|21|
|BUCKHORN CREEK	|20|
|SHEEP CREEK	|20|
|ELK CREEK	|19|
|PLUM CREEK	|19|
|SAND CREEK	|19|
|TRAIL CREEK	|19|
|CROW CREEK	|18|
|LITTLE DRY CREEK	|18|
|SOUTH CLEAR CREEK	|18|
|BOXELDER CREEK	|17|
|EAST PLUM CREEK	|17|
|NORTH FORK CACHE LA POUDRE RIVER	|17|
|WILLOW CREEK	|17|
|FALL RIVER	|16|
|NORTH SAINT VRAIN CREEK	|16|
|TWIN CREEK	|16|
|TROUT CREEK	|15|
|EAST CHERRY CREEK	|14|
|LAKEWOOD GULCH	|14|
|CORRAL CREEK	|13|
|LOST CREEK	|13|
|NORTH CLEAR CREEK	|13|
|NORTH FORK REPUBLICAN RIVER	|13|
|NORTH TURKEY CREEK	|13|
|RABBIT CREEK	|13|
|SOUTH LONE PINE CREEK	|13|
|SOUTH SAINT VRAIN CREEK	|13|
|BOX ELDER CREEK	|12|
|ELKHORN CREEK	|12|
|MILL CREEK	|12|
|VANCE CREEK	|12|
|DEADMAN GULCH	|11|
|FOURMILE CANYON CREEK	|11|
|GORDON CREEK	|11|
|HIGH CREEK	|11|
|JARRE CREEK	|   11|
|NORTH LONE PINE CREEK	|11|
|WEST CHERRY CREEK	|11|
|BUFFALO CREEK	|10|
|OWL CREEK	|10|
|TURKEY CREEK	|10|
|TWELVEMILE CREEK	|10| -->

<!-- Source for table and map: Colorado's Decision Support Systems, [Structures](https://www.colorado.gov/pacific/cdss/gis-data-category) shapefile. -->